
         IntrList ÄÄ The Encyclopaedic Reference for PC Interrupts

Window Books are on-line reference manuals that can be read under DOS, 
MS-Windows, and there's even a dual-platform version that works
under both. Call (617) 661-9515 or fax (617) 354-3961 for information 
about other operating platforms: Unix, Xenix, OS/2, etc...
  
These books are easy to use, apply state-of-the-art data compression   
(so you don't waste valuable disk space), can be run on a network (yes, one   
book can be simultaneously read by two or more people running either DOS or   
MS-Windows or any combination), and are easier to use than printed manuals   
because of our unique cross-referencing and indexing technology.
  
Window Books are so easy to use that printed documentation is generally not   
needed - although you can print out any or all of the documentation that is   
contained in the Window Book itself. Just be sure to press the F1 help key
while you are first using your new Window Book.
  
Note: This Window Book is designed to work under DOS only. 
Call (617) 661-9515 or fax (617) 354-3961 if you want an MS-Windows version.

You can run INTRLIST directly from the diskette. Place the diskette
in drive A, then at the DOS prompt type   A:INTRLIST
           C>A:INTRLIST

Here is the one-step installation procedure:
  
        1) Place the disk in drive A:,
           then at the DOS prompt type   A:INSTALL
           C>A:INSTALL

Following installation, to run INTRLIST, at the DOS Prompt, type  INTRLIST
           C>INTRLIST
           
To run INTRLIST as a background-resident pop-up, with the Alt+Esc "hotkey"
combination, add the /B parameter:
        C>INTRLIST /B

To run INTRLIST as a background-resident pop-up, with your own private "hotkey"
combination, add the /B and the /HK:? parameters:
        C>INTRLIST /B /HK:?

where ? can be a function key F1-F10 (yielding hotkey combinations
Alt-F1 thru Alt+F10), or a letter A-Z (yielding hotkey combinations
Ctrl+Shift+A thru Ctrl+Shift+Z), or a number 0-9 (yielding hotkey 
combinations Ctrl+Shift+0 thru Ctrl+Shift+9)
                                     
Basic Keyboard Commands: 
  
Grey+  The + key on the numeric keypad. Displays the next topic in the Table 
       of Contents. This is like turning a page forward in a book. This 
       isn't operational when you are reading a topic at which you arrived 
       using Cross-Reference.
Shift+PgDn does the same.
   
Grey-  The - key on the numeric keypad. Displays the previous topic in the 
       Table of Contents. This is like turning a page back in a book. 
Shift+PgUp does the same.

Insert The 0 key on the numeric keypad. When a topic contains hypertext
       links, this key alternately activates/deactivates them.
   
PgDn   Moves the text in the topic you are reading up by one windowful.
           
PgUp   Moves the text in the topic you are reading down by one windowful.
   
Home   Takes you to the top of the topic you are reading. 
   
End    Takes you to the bottom of the topic you are reading.

F1     Provides on-line HELP on how to operate the Window Book.

F2     Pops up the Table of Contents window.

F3     Pops up the Index window

F10    Closes the Window Book

Esc    Returns you to the previous screen.

If you have any questions, please feel free to call (617) 661-9515.


